
Students perform better in the classroom when their teachers are proficient in the subject they teach and they remain committed to the teaching profession.  However, studies in K-12 teacher retention demonstrates that between 15-25% of teachers leave the profession in the first 6 years of teaching.  In a recent study, it is estimated that an urban school district can lose over $20,000 for each teacher who leaves (Carver-Thomas and Darling-Hamond, 2017, MFA).  Furthermore, a recent study found that teachers from the science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines are more likely to leave than those from other fields in education (Sutcher, Darling-Hammond, and Carver-Thomas, 2016, MFA).  Teacher retention in K-12 education has important economic both nationally and on the local level.  This is especially true for the math and science disciplines, which are in need of a diverse workforce for future economic development.   

Studies demonstrate that salary enhances recruitment and encourages retention of math and science teachers (Ingersoll, Merril, & May, 2012).  However, there are studies that show concepts in professional identity (motivation, efficacy, integrity, wellness, etc.) play a significant role as well in teacher identity.  

The purpose of this study is to explore and visualize concepts of professional identity in math and science education to better help educators, educational administrators, educational non-profits, and policy makers create better solutions to teacher retention in the math and science disciplines.  The study approaches this phenomena in two parts. First, the study analyzes and interprets professional identity by using a data set from a science and math teaching fellowship program.  Second, the study will examine the effectiveness of using machine learning (Natural Language Processing) and data visualization methods as a means to analyze written reflections of early career secondary educators who STEM courses.   Teachers in this study are participants in a fellowship program that encourages professional development and engagement. The sponsoring non-profit organization collected four years of data used for this study.  For the analysis, the data set was de-identified, and it includes biannual reflections required by the non-profit organization, text from open ended questions on their original application, enrollment rates in professional development workshops, engagement in professional activities, professional recognitions, program withdraw records, courses taught, gender, and race/ethnicity.  

Natural Language Processing was used to identify patterns in the text and sentiment analysis to identify professional efficacy attributes (e.g., engagement, teaching motivation, locus of control).  In addition, I analyzed quantified participation and workshop enrollment rates to create a triangulation technique to help measure the effectiveness of Natural Language Processing.  Data visualization methods were also used to help analyze the data and help interpret the journey of professional efficacy for early career STEM postsecondary teachers.

The study will first highlight the problem of teacher retention in science and math education and how its related to professional identity by reviewing the literature in teacher education and professional development.  The study will next explore the data set and the methods used to conduct the analysis and create the visualizations for this study.  Finally, the study will review the results of the analysis and visualization and discuss the implications of the study findings on professional development and identity in science and math K-12 education.  
